
Now, we read in the subsequent verses of the same sura about a lesson that was addressed to this group, bringing it to their attention that they would not be able to continue this practice in circumstances such as illness, travelling and fighting, and recommending them to remain awake only as and when the conditions of their lives allowed it.Later in Medina, the same excessive spirit of devotion appeared among some practitioners, and was equally condemned as an abuse, opposed to the spirit of the law. 

It appears from the corpus of Qur'anic and prophetic texts related to this subject that Islam attaches great importance to certain considerations of which the devout must not lose sight, and whose omission would be the natural consequence of this excess. As has come to be seen, not only must man guard against excessive practice to the detriment of other duties (trade, war ... ), but the pious act itself must not degenerate into an automatic formula, where one no longer has a clear awareness of what one is doing, or saying.The Prophet even observes that, forcing oneself to prolong the night prayer may interfere with the sensory system, causing regrettable slips of the tongue: instead of begging for God's forgiveness, one might utter blasphemies or call down curses upon oneself.Without waiting to reach this point, a simple bodily lethargy or mental satiety will be enough to allow oneself to rest from these devout activities.The application of a pious action should last only as long as it gives joy and cheerfulness to the heart, for we must not make divine worship hateful to ourselves. One last remark, and not the least judicious, is that someone who weighs up an action excessively is often led to find fault in that very action, or even never to perform it again. The Prophet compares such a person to a severe horse rider who continually tortures his mount, causing it die before he has reached his destination.All these examples are not so much concerned with removing an actual difficulty, as with preventing certain eventual difficulties that are likely to happen. The solution offered does not change anything in the structure of the action, but rather in its timing: it imposes a voluntary cessation at the right moment. 

We now consider the second aspect. We are dealing here with a duty which has been established in either normal circumstances, or in appropriate, specific ones; since these conditions change, they put us in a situation where performing our duty fully, as originally defined, becomes a real difficulty. Are we still to perform it notwithstanding? Is God so indifferent to our suffering as not to take into account the new situation? Certainly not, and this is where the merciful characteristic of Qur'anic law appears most clearly. In effect, the solution will consist of an adaptation of duty to the new conditions of life; the action will undergo a considerable modification: this will be, according to what circumstances require, a mutation, an attenuation, a postponement or even an abrogation. Whether the change in the situation is definitive and permanent, or relative to a particular case, or to a particular category of people or thing, the same considerations will apply to the action. 

Let us take the example where the duty has been attenuated in a definitive way. What is the numerical proportion in which Muslims who have been invaded must put up an armed resistance against their enemy? One to ten. This is the first solution that the Qur'an gave to the first Muslim army, when they numbered only a few hundred men. But, one curious thing is that the nation grew more numerous, and it never returned to its original state, since these young, eager people do not seem to have had the same energetic qualities as before. This is explained as a kind of natural relaxation, due to the great numbers of people who came to their aid and whose presence seemed to exempt each member from making a personal effort. In such unavoidable psychological conditions, how could such a community be obliged to attain the same heroism as the one at the beginning? Nevertheless, with a moral advantage through the faith that inspires him, the Muslim fighter will always have a lead over his opponent and cannot lower himself to be his equal. From this comes the second and final solution in which the ratio is now one to two. 

In this example, the law concerning such a difficult case was revealed at a later date. More often, it is given at the same time. Besides the normal case, where one is in a position to act, the rule foresees an exceptional case for which it gives an issue. Sometimes, it is a full dispensation. Thus, men who are sick are exempted from their military duty.People who find themselves oppressed in their country and who must search elsewhere for a secure place to exercise their freedom of faith and religion, will be allowed to remain if they cannot afford to go back.A traveller who cannot find wholesome, permitted food can, and even must within limit, nourish himself with anything available, rather than allow himself to starve to death. Sometimes it is a partial dispensation: On a journey, four-unit prayers are reduced by hal£.During battle, prayers may be performed walking or riding. Sometimes, it is a simple remission: Sick people and travellers do not have to fast at the prescribed time; they can make up for it later.Sometimes, the action which could not be performed is replaced by an easier one. A traveller who cannot find water for his ablution, or a sick person unable to use it, can perform the action symbolically, which consists of touching a clean stone or clean sand and then passing the hands over the face and arms. It may be observed that, in most of these examples, the text puts the emphasis on the practical gentleness that they imply and which characterises the mercy of the divine law. Thus they happen to have the necessary quality for demonstrating that it is not something accidental, or a matter of chance, but an essential principle, whose means of application is constantly sought. 

Let us look at another aspect of this relationship between duty and circumstance. In the aspects which we have studied up to now, the obstacle before which the obligation made some concession was a natural one, not a human creation. How about when, out of necessity, a mechanism has been set up that man himself has created and that he is capable of dismantling? Cases arise, nevertheless, where, in the long run, this device becomes like a rebellious and stubborn second nature. Is one to shrink away from this difficulty, treating it like a reality beyond man, for whose evolution one must passively wait? The original solution of the Qur'anic legislation is entirely different. It consists of approaching this situation and working it out with particular skill, with a view to allowing man gradually to go back up the slope which he descended, so that once he has reached a certain level, he will even accept the moral order, up to now set aside. 

A very striking example of this is found in the Qur'an's position with regard to a bad habit that is continually transmitted from generation to generation and deeply rooted in the nervous system and whole body of those who have acquired it; we are speaking of this stupefaction, this scourge of humanity, which is alcoholism. There are four passages in which one finds allusions to the state of drunkenness and fermented (alcoholic) drinks. Only the fourth and final one formally states the prohibition of these drinks. The first three are only progressive stages to prepare the psychological ground for the believers to accept this prohibition. 

The first stage of this path was put into effect by a word revealed at Mecca, a single word which hardly touches on the subject. Among the good gifts that God has provided in nature, the Qur'an cites: the fruit of the date-palm and of the grape-vine 16:67 and it immediately adds: You derive both intoxicants and wholesome provision. 16:67 Only in understanding this parallelism, where alcohol is compared to other produce which is qualified as good, without it being qualified as the same, do the believers already have sufficient motive to feel some scruple with regard to this drink. 

Then, soon after their arrival in Medina, they are struck anew by a second statement, which is meant to reinforce their scruples. It consists of a brief comparison between the advantages and disadvantages of alcohol and games of chance. From this comparison, the Qur'an concludes in these terms: But the harm in them is greater than the benefit. 2:219 If it is true that nothing in this world is absolutely good or bad, that which is called good or bad only contains a relatively high degree, then this conclusion had to be taken as a veritable condemnation. It is only because the prohibition was not clear enough in everyone's mind that a number of Muslims, perhaps the majority, continued to drink whilst the others started from the beginning of this era to abstain. It was necessary, therefore, for something more explicit to bring everyone to a clear conviction. However, it was not without an effect on those in the community who were unaware. As for the strong-minded, they waited to receive a definitive decision confirming their point of view. In fact, an injunction did come, but it was not definitive, forming only an intermediary stage. At this third stage, it was not said: 'Do not drink', but only: Do not approach the prayer when you are drunk. 4:43 One will realise the progress made by this step if one considers that the prayer in Islam constitutes not only the first religious duty to be performed regularly, but also the external criterion, the sign that designates the true believer, which must be performed five times a day, including four between midday and night. This means that a person who drinks during these intervals risks missing his most sacred duty. This partial and indirect interdiction was thus a practical way of spacing out the periods of alcoholic dependency, whilst at the same time reducing the sale of drinks, so as to clear them from the market progressively, without causing an economic crisis through a complete and sudden prohibition. 

From there to a definitive prohibition and clearing the market once and for all, there only remained one step, and it was taken by the fourth and last formulation: You who believe, intoxicants and gambling, idolatrous practices, and [divining with] arrows are repugnant acts- Satan's doing: shun them so that you may prosper. 5:90 This gentle and progressive approach reminds us of the way clever doctors treat a chronic illness; or more generally of the way that mothers wean their infants. Without any violence or harshness, the digestive system is led by these means gradually to change its diet from light to more nourishing foods, passing through all the intermediary stages. How infinitely more gentle than medical skill or motherly tenderness does divine mercy appear! The progressive method we have just detailed is apparent not just in particular examples, it is also applied in an equally clear manner throughout the whole of Islamic ethics, as it is in the institution of Islam in general. We know that the Qur'an, which plays a principal role in this institution, was not sent down all at once and in the form that we see it today. On the contrary, it appeared gradually over about twenty years in the form of fragments of various lengths during two periods of roughly the same duration: the Meccan period and the Medinan period. It can easily be seen that the passages belonging to the first period are essentially concerned with establishing the faith and the principles and general rules of behaviour; that, with the exception of the rules regarding prayer and food, the application of these practical rules for solving particular moral or legal problems was almost completely reserved for the second period. From this point of view, one could say that the whole of the Meccan period was a kind of preparation. The particular applications of these general principles were so spread out, over a period of ten years or so, that each new prescription constituted a progression in the realm of obligation, relating to the previous stage and a point of departure for the next stage. Setting aside the particular accompanying circumstances, explaining and justifying the establishment of each new duty, and considering this series of commandments, each separated by long intervals, one can see that it is a pedagogical method of the highest value. It is enough to imagine what would have happened if this entire multitude of commands ruling every aspect of life had been delivered all at once and in a sudden manner; spread out in this way, each soul was perfectly accommodated, as if it gradually increased in strength and ability as it practised obeying each new command. 

The unbelievers living at the time of the Prophet failed to understand this refined legislative wisdom. This is why they protested Why was the Qur'an not sent down to him all at And the same verse which mentions this objection continues, providing us with the reply: It is so that We can fortify your heart by it. 25:32 In another passage, we read a second explanation: so you can recite it to mankind at intervals, and We have sent it down little by A'isha very well understood the meaning of this. cumar II, in tum, underlined its importance in the political field. One day his son c Abd al-Malik reproached him for being too patient: 'Why do you take so long in settling your business?' cumar replied: 'My son, do not be too zealous; God twice warned against wine, and He only forbade it the third time. If I were to impose the truth all at once, I fear people would only reject it all at once and this would generate discord. ' 98 C The delimitation and grading of duties Thus, moral obligation in the Qur'an is given with a twofold condition: the action to which it refers must be possible for ordinary human beings (subject to the will of man) and approachable in the concrete reality of life (practical, not tyrannical). 

This is not all. Even if it does not leave the realm of moral good, it is not enough for an action to be possible and practicable for it to be included under the category of duty. Here we meet a hierarchy of values, both positive and negative, cleverly arranged and richly detailed. In the first place, if we set apart elementary and definite duties whose application is not debatable (such as, not lying, returning what one has been entrusted to keep, helping anyone in immediate danger), there remains creative, constructive virtue, a field of activity which is so vast that it comprises endless degrees, all possible and practicable. Are we to perform them all, or is it enough to begin with something? In other terms, are goodness and duty two co-extensive notions? Do there not exist, beyond what is strictly obligatory, more and more meritorious degrees which we can ignore without falling into immorality? If we consult individual consciences, the diversity of responses certainly reveals opposing tendencies, as not all human beings have the same requirements and moral energies. Whereas strong place their duty at the highest possible degree of perfection and thus equate these two concepts, the masses tend to remain at a low degree and define duty according to a minimum of humanity and sociability. 

Despite what he says, we hesitate to class Kant among the philosophers who maintain the correlation between the idea of obligation and that of good, in the broadest sense of that word. This is because, in order to place the notion of duty above everything, he started by excluding all connections between man and a superior being and inferior beings from his area of investigation, thus limiting it to the individual and human society. Then, within these restricted parameters, he further distinguished two categories of duties which he calls perfect, or essential and imperfect, or accidental.° Finally, the duties which he includes in the latter category are precisely those whose aim is the perfection of the self and the happiness of others; the duties he calls strict are nothing but prohibitions: not to debase man, or to use him as a means to an end. The only perfection he deems absolutely obligatory, and at the same time impossible in this life, is that of moral intention, which consists in doing one's duty for duty's sake only. 

But to those who extend duty to all forms of good, and who also wish to make the highest degree of perfection possible a rigorous obligation in every domain, one may ask whether they consider all of these perfections a duty for everyone, or whether they leave everyone the choice of the domain which he wishes to perfect. It is clear that, according to the first hypothesis, something is demanded which is far beyond human ability, but, in the case of the second, does it satisfy the moral need of man if he is monopolised by one value to which he devotes himself entirely, to the detriment of the others? The human being is a synthesis of relationships: the personal, familial, social, human and divine; a system of elements that are interdependent and closely linked; all liable to evolution and progress, so that none can be neglected without damaging, deforming or mutilating the 'admirable proportion' in which man is created. The moral sense demands the progression of this ensemble altogether, which is only possible on condition that all parts are raised together to a certain level. The human soul must partake in all values, before it specialises in one of them more specifically. This is the Islamic view of duty. From this co-ordination of values, it necessarily results that in each branch of life, duty must occupy only a certain part of the good which is both possible and practicable for this very branch, and leave space for others to satisfy their own demands and obtain their legitimate share of our endeavours. This is a criterion whose upper limit can be ascertained by balanced minds, and of which each virtue ceases to be itself if it violates another virtue. 

However, this upper limit, which varies according to the intelligence and conditions of every being, only partially and negatively defines the field of moral good. Everyone recognises various degrees of merit in this vast field. 

Failing at one level or another leads to either severe condemnation, or light reproof; occasionally it arouses no reaction from the conscience at all. Does this not tacitly acknowledge that there must be two different values in the realm of good: a compulsory minimum and a more meritorious supplement? Consciences are not mistaken in that, but in wishing to consider the obligatory as the lowest possible level, a criterion in which people generally do not find their satisfaction. The upright man requires more. He vaguely conceives of an average of goodness, which cannot be measured precisely. How are we to define this average for every one of our duties? The human mind cannot provide a rational and objective criterion. Should we refer to the individual conscience? Then there would be no agreement on anything. Should we work together to establish a conventional limit? This would mean resorting to arbitrary opinion. Yet we need such definitions. for the law to be universal, it is necessary to have a certain homogeneous basis; otherwise, no rule would remain and the law would only be a meaningless word. Various attempts have been made rationally to define our strict duty towards our fellow human beings, but these have only been able to give the negative aspect, which is not to wrong others. Men thus are entitled to our justice, but not to our charity. Here, selfishness is established in law! And how are we to measure the minimum necessary of our duties towards God and ourselves? Islamic ethics offers precious insights on all these points. 

Aside from the absolute duty that carries no restriction or limitation, namely, the act of faith, it indicates two levels of good for each possible action and it names them quite distinctively and precisely: the 'quantum minima' below which one cannot go without neglecting one's duty, or above without exceeding the maximum; in other words, the obligatory good and the recommended good. Already that which it designates as strictly necessary represents a substantial participation in each merit. Besides that, in each domain the Qur'an opens the way to an ever greater participation and encourages everyone not to stop at this ordinary level, but always to rise to even higher degrees of merit. Above the established right it places the virtue of tolerance and insists above all on 'generosity'.If a debtor cannot pay back the debt, it is a duty to allow him more time; but it is more praiseworthy to allow him not to repay at all.It is a right to resist injustice but to endure and forgive: is one of the most magnanimous things 42:41-3 To perform one's duty well is good enough but: If anyone does good spontaneously, Allah is Responsive, All-Knowing. 2:157 Parallel to the degrees of positive value which one comes to discern in the Qur'anic concept of moral good, it is easy to recognise those negative values, which the Qur'an places opposite. However, with these two parallel columns the scale of values is still not exhausted, even at its basic level. The two opposites are brought closer together by a medium term, which links them without giving a solution of continuity. Between the value and the anti-value, the Qur'an places the non-value; between the prescribed and the proscribed, there is the non-proscribed. Similarly, in the acts which are prescribed it distinguishes firstly the primary duty, then other obligations, then finally more and more meritorious actions, and in those which are proscribed it ranks the unforgivable, then other bad actions, serious or venial, just as it establishes two degrees in the non-proscribed acts: the permissible and the tolerated. One is entitled to ask if anything can be added by the most sensitive and refined mind to such a hierarchy of values? It is in vain that we try to find some lacuna that might be likely to justify the appellation 'separatist mind', coined by L. Gauthier to describe the Islamic mind, which had established this hierarchy, acknowledged by the author as something purely Muslim: 'The juxtaposition of opposites is the formula in which everything is summarised in the Arab world, especially Muslim Arab world: religion, history, and so on.' That said, let us now resume our exposition at the point where we left off, to say a word on the true meaning of this gradation, which concerns Qur'anic allowances and permissions. Needless to say, permission in the proper sense of the word only refers to actions which are morally As for the allowances, one must first discard the idea of making a concession to something that relaxes mores, or to someone's passions and caprices. Before anything, this would be a negation of ethics itself, which by definition is a rule of conduct. What is it to obey a rule, if not to hold to it firmly and not to give in to temptations to turn away from it? That is given. If there is a kind of difficulty towards which the Qur'an shows itself to be inflexible and which it encourages us to conquer at any price, it is precisely that which implies resisting our inclinations. One has to choose between obedience to God and submission to our own unbridled desires: Do not follow your own desires, letting them misguide you from the way of Allah 38:25 Do not follow your own desires, and deviate from the truth. 4:135 Who could be further astray than someone who follows his whims and desires? 28:50 Thus, in the allowances made by the Qur'an, it is not a matter of inclining towards our whims. It is purely and simply a matter of taking into consideration the concrete reality to which we apply our activity, not that one goes down this path to the point of abandoning our effort and dispensing with our duty. We have seen that, in general, it is not in itself that the rule is subordinate to the situation, but in its spatio-temporal determinations: quantity, duration, form, date, and so on. If one does not wish for the moral law to become a dead letter, it must not be enclosed within a rigid framework of times, places and entirely external conditions; it must be applicable either in one form or another. It is only natural and just that the effectiveness of this application demands some adaptability to real conditions which are beyond our control. When, at the extreme limit, faced with the insurmountable obstacle of this reality, obligation gives way to necessity (such as in the case of an incapacitated man who cannot perform his military duty, or a deprived and starving person who can only find impure food), it is essentially a matter of preventing complete exhaustion from one single practice to the detriment of others of equal or more importance. The aim of the gentleness of this legislation is therefore not to diminish, but to rationalise effort. We shall see how the Qur'an has formed a synthesis of these two notions, but let us first clarify the Qur'anic position with regard to problems pertaining to the very concept of obligation. 

Antinomies of obligation With the notion of obligation, we are, in effect, at the crossroads of a multitude of practical antinomies, from among which all moral thought is extracted and with regard to which it must take a particular position. We draw attention to two principal antinomies below. 

1) Unity and diversity It is an indisputable fact that, if ethics is a science, it must be constructed not from specific and contingent propositions, but from laws which are both universal and necessary. None the less, if it is also a normative science, designed to govern human action, then it must consider life in its concrete reality. Life is essentially diversity, change and renewal. We are thus drawn to the following alternatives: either the model of behaviour which this science presents is considered to be immutable and universal, or it is open to variations and modifications. According to the first hypothesis, humanity is taken back to a single type that is perpetually identical to itself; space is then reduced to a point, time to an instant, the movement of the universe stops and life itself is removed and replaced by an abstract idea, which exists only in the imagination of the moralist. If, however, one takes into account the irreducible, inalienable characteristic of the singular action, which is subject to the alteration of time and the disparity of space, we can no longer talk of a rule, a law or a science. For what is a rule that is destined to die as soon as it is created; a law which only commands an individual for one instant; a science without any universality? So, to safeguard the unity of the law or to respect the diversity of the nature ruled by this law; to maintain the simplicity of the rule or to subordinate it to the complexity of the life to which it is applied; to rise to a pure and eternal ideal, or to descend to an ever-changing reality; to make the essence prevail, or existence? These are the extremes against which we must guard. We cannot approach one to any extent without distancing ourselves from the other. This is the first ethical difficulty. 

2) Authority and liberty However, there is another problem, which, moreover, is linked to the first. It is beyond question that the relationship expressed in the word obligation is one which puts two different wills together, and is even conveyed by their very natures, manifesting antagonistic tendencies: the legislator who commands, jealous of his authority, and the subject who acts, defending his freedom. The legislator's authority is all the more respected if the rules which it establishes keep their statements intact and so fixed that circumstantial variations do not interfere at all in order to limit or attenuate them. In such conditions, moral law becomes similar to natural law; the subject only submits to it passively and applies it blindly, so that the necessary response to pure obligation is worthless freedom and servile submission. Then what good is this conscience, if its presence or absence does not change anything in the course of things? If one satisfies the active subject, granting him complete freedom of action, the opposite effect will be produced: a command will be transformed into a simple piece of advice, which we can accept or ignore, according to our personal opinion. 

Faced with these contradictory demands are we to choose one, or to try to compromise? Which one to take? Which conciliation to make? This is the problem that must be resolved. We will now see how it has been solved in various ways. In the following lines and up to the end of the chapter, we propose to demonstrate how the Qur'anic solution can be considered as an impartial conciliation to all parties concerned, whereas ordinary doctrines have varying tendencies to opt only for one or the other of the two opposing terms. We will reserve the first of these two assertions for the latter paragraph, which will be assigned to the conclusion and proceed with the second, underlining the difficulties encountered by two current theories which are typical of two extreme views, one representing the intransigent authority of universal duty, the other defending the originality of psychological factors over the invariability of logic: the theories of Kant and Rauh. 

Kant It is known that, in order to resist certain doctrines which had softened ethics too much, accommodating them to the demands of worldly life, the German philosopher was not content to trace a line of demarcation between morality and feelings. He went further - too far. According to him, the concept of duty is not only isolated from any experience of the senses or concrete reality to which it may be applied, but it is also purged of its own characteristic, of the constitutive content of any particular rule, in order to conserve only its formal characteristic, that of being a universal law, valid for everyone. It is from this that he takes his definition of duty: any action whose rule can be made universal without becoming absurd. From such an abstract formula, Kant thought he could deduce a 'deontology' of ethics, to use Bentham's words; that is, a science of concrete duties, which specifies for each duty whether it is moral or immoral, just by considering whether or not it can be made universal. Is such an undertaking achievable? Is the very foundation of this construction solid enough to support it? Here, from the point of view with which we are concerned, is Kantian thought. It may be said that, overall, it constitutes three stages in its elaboration: a) the establishment of the initial act; b) an analysis allowing an ascent to the most general principle; c) descending again to set out the fundamental rules for human ethics. 

a) The starting point of the Kantian doctrine consists of the concrete act that is supplied by the immediate conscience, which is to say that, in our moral judgements, we evaluate actions not in virtue of their results, be they pleasant or unpleasant, but in relation to the idea of a general rule, applicable to all subjects and independent of any consequences. This fact is undeniable. 

Far from establishing the pursuit of pleasure and the avoidance of suffering as a principle of moral evaluation, we value virtuous actions according to their cost to ourselves. We praise to the highest degree the strength of character of those who know how to resist all temptations and how to overcome all obstacles. Far from giving ourselves the right to subordinate the rule of our own behaviour to our ephemeral, subjective moods, we acknowledge that we must measure it by that which we demand of others. 'Whatever you wish people to do for you, do the same for them.' This is what the Holy Scriptures enjoin us to do.And the Qur'an insists: Do not give away the bad things that you yourself would only accept with your eyes closed. 2:267 The Prophet of Islam goes so far as to make this egalitarian love the very condition of faith. 'Nobody can call himself a believer if he does not like for his brother that which he likes for himself.' 11° From this unanimous condemnation of selfishness in all its forms, the conscience of the ordinary person has already taken the principle of the universality and reciprocity of duty. 

Thus, from the beginning, Kant only took note of this law, establishing it as an act of the conscience. Although he himself has shown how such antique statements are insufficient for providing a full ethical system,it is, however, the idea they inspired that nevertheless constitutes his entire system. Indeed, he refers to the judgement of 'the most ordinary mind' in order to establish his essential rule of judgement - subject to the laws of practical pure reason, a rule which he formulates as follows: 'Ask yourself that if the action that you intend to do happens according to a natural law of which you make yourself a part, do you still consider it possible for you to will it?' 'For instance,' he continues, 'everyone knows very well that if one person were to permit himself to cheat in secret, that would be no reason for everyone else to do the same; that if he were to be completely indifferent to the misery of others, it would not mean that everyone should feel the same towards him.'112 b) Where does this implacable demand for an ideal action which is not modelled on any experience come from? The founder of practical formalism explains that it arises because moral law transports us in an ideal fashion to a sphere which is completely different from that of empirical law. It allows us to participate in a pure, intelligible world, wherein the autonomy of the will consists not only in its being independent of the natural law of the senses, which is only a negative aspect of freedom, but also in the fact that the will gives itself its own law. This law must be that of pure reason, which is not only free of every empirical condition, every intuition and every substance, but also capable of determining the will a priori; for pure reason is so constituted that, in its practical as well as in its theoretical usage, it is 'one and the same reason which judges according to a priori principles'.Now, there is nothing but the pure form of universal legislation which is capable of determining the will a priori. This is why every pronouncement must adapt itself to this form, at the risk of being morally impossible. 

Therefore, not only is this universality similar to that of natural law, by which an ordinary judgement must guide itself like a principle that is typical of pure reason, but it is an absolute universality applicable to all reasonable beings, finite and infinite, with its foundation upon an apodictic judgement, that is to say necessary and a priori, of pure reason. Kant states this fundamental law of pure practical reason thus: 'Act in such a way that the principle determining your will can also be valued as a principle of universal legislation.'Even this still has the appearance of the 'trivial' reason which Kant wished to transcend. 

c) Once the pinnacle of abstraction has been reached, with the most general formulation imaginable, we may excuse ourselves from describing the slope down which one must descend in order to discover how this general law applies to human nature. 
