
Let us now make this journey again in its three successive stages in order to examine its merits. 

a) First we ask if there really exists a necessary connection between universality and morality? Is it true that the necessary and sufficient condition for attributing a moral characteristic to a rule is that it should have the potential to become a universal law? Is it also true that 'if a rule does not generally withstand the test of the form of a natural law, it is morally impossible'?If one is to believe our author, this double criterion contains 'the canon which allows us to evaluate our actions in general'and the means of self-instruction which is 'the quickest, since it is infallible'.'With this pair of compasses in hand, one has, in every case that arises, all the means necessary to distinguish between that which is good and that which is bad, that which conforms to and that which is contrary to duty.'It does not require too much discernment to see how much the first part of this criterion brings extremely diverse values together within the same concept, from duty to that which is completely the opposite, including actions which are either neutral or doubtful. Indeed, with the exception of certain kinds of behaviour which man would not find acceptable if done in return to him, everything else must seem to him to constitute faultless behaviour, whose rules can be converted into a universal law, commencing with the rule that the decent man makes for himself as a part of his daily life: to follow his innocent inclinations, which is to say those whose satisfaction is clearly permissible. In this way, the act which is morally good and the act which is neutral become indistinguishable within the concept of 'a possible universal law', and duty is brought down to the level of that which is simply allowed, because it is one thing to say that a law must be made universal, but another to say that a law can be so. The Kantian formulation, like the 'vulgar' statement to which it appeals, is incapable of providing the difference between an obligatory act and one that is not forbidden. However, it is known with what care Kant distinguished two categories of rules concerning duty (for instance, doing good to others): one which merely commands conformity to duty (for whatever reason: a kind personality, vanity or self-interest), and one which also demands that it be determined by the idea of duty. Now it is clear that the criterion of 'possible', even 'necessary', universality does not take into account such an extremely important distinction, which leads to a second confusion: between morality and legality. The most unfortunate confusion is that which his so-called 'touchstone' may introduce in the individual conscience, by granting it the right to declare any action morally good which it willingly elevates to the universal, even if it were the most reprehensible, either according to common wisdom or at least according to Kantian wisdom itself. If we examine the feelings of those who make fairly serious derogations to moral law (such as a doctor who lies to a patient in order to bring him back to health, a philanthropist who tells a white lie to save a life, or the sensitive man who prefers to commit suicide rather than to live with dishonour), do they not give their rules the value of a universal law, before they are applied to anyone placed in the same conditions as themselves? Well! Would a cynic who indulges in the basest debauchery find any objection if everybody followed his example? Are there not others who would establish nudism and all its immoral consequences as a universal law? Conversely, it is the rules which cannot be elevated to the universal without contradicting themselves, or compromising human nature, which nevertheless we cannot accuse of immorality. Suppose a man makes it a rule to attain a stage of moral perfection that nobody has reached before. Not only would such an idea be completely destroyed if it were universalised, but also if it were even just slightly extended, for then a higher stage would no longer be a higher stage. Is this a reason for qualifying the rule as immoral? Here is another example: someone who is celibate. Let one whole generation enforce the obligation not to marry and the last living person of this generation will inevitably spell the end of humanity. Can one declare the rule of celibacy, so praised in Christianity, to be a crime? What would Kant himself have thought? The parallelism of the universal and the moral is broken, both in its positive and negative aspects. However, it does remain true, at least, that there exists a certain necessary relationship between the obligatory and the universal, a unilateral relation, the meaning and import of which we shall explain later. 

b) Kant does not limit himself to establishing the universality of our duties as a concrete, empirical and contingent fact. Nor is he content with a semiabstraction that makes human reason a faculty of the universal. Rather, he goes still higher, to capture the very essence of practical reason itself and he presents this fundamental law of pure reason as an inflexible necessity, not of any particular rule 'determined for certain actions', but of a universal law in general.He asserts that moral law must be in the form of a law in general, in the most abstract universality, and not in any other form, if duty is not to be a 'chimerical concept'. Kant states that he was not led to his formalism by any philosophical need for abstraction or by any imitation of Aristotle's logical formalism, but by moral considerations of the highest importance, by the very logic of morality, because, he says, if the moral value of the action does not reside in the results expected, or in its affinity with our inclinations, but in its relationship with the law; and if elsewhere this law is an a priori fact of reason, of this faculty which is autonomous and independent of the faculty of the senses, one must set aside both empiricism, which sees good consisting in useful consequences, and mysticism, which wanders in the transcendent, and keep to rationalism, which alone is appropriate for moral concepts.We can agree with him so far. Now, he adds, since I have deprived the will of all impulses and results, there only remains universal conformity with the law in general,which alone must serve as the guiding principle. In other words, if matter, which is the object of the will, were a determining principle, the will would be subject to an empirical condition, 'whereas, by removing all matter through the process of abstraction, only form remains'. In our opinion, here lies the equivocation and lack of rigour by which this argument has left a gap between the premises and the conclusion; for, when one has removed impulses from the senses, and other pragmatic considerations, one has not exhausted all the possible ways to reach pure form. Can there not be seen a middle ground between the matter rejected and the form that has been chosen? It is neither matter as 'object of desire', subordinated to personal experience, which is variable for everyone, nor form, which is entirely empty and devoid of all content; instead, it is a thinkable concept, an object of understanding, acknowledged a priori, imposing itself upon everyone through the representation of its intrinsic value. Would this not have escaped the evils of empiricism while preventing itself from becoming lost in formalism? By a sort of logical need, it is true, we impose a universal form on all our rules, in order to make them pass for moral laws. We cannot accept that an action should be obligatory for some and not for others placed in similar circumstances. It offends reason; but this necessary link between matter and form is only one aspect: every duty is universaL but the opposite is not true. This is because, in order to establish this relationship, moral judgement begins by perceiving within the action a value in itself which through its internal logic tends to expand; a value of a particular nature, both practicable and accessible to all individuals. Any way of behaving which does not fulfil this dual condition cannot be a moral law. It is what it is, except for a duty; but it is not necessarily a crime; it may be an optional action (such as celibacy), or the most meritorious action (the sublime heroism of a superman). Just because divine virtue is the highest moral value that does not mean that it is a universal law for all reasonable beings. If this is so -that is to say, if not all values have the ability to take the form of a universal law, and we have to choose from among them the one whose very nature demands this universality - all the more reason that the only logical possibility for any rule to fit this abstract formula is far from providing us with the criterion of moral good. The consideration of a law's universality hardly precludes any consideration of its legitimacy. Now we maintain that, if, in order to decide whether a rule is legitimate, one were content to consider the pure idea of law in general, without examining its content and meaning, it would be impossible to establish that one practice were moral and another were not, the virtue any more than the vice. Kant acknowledges that something which can be used for good or evil is not good absolutely. Is this not very much the case with formalism? The universal form is only a mould in which one can bake either a cake or a brick. 

The great paradox of the Kantian doctrine is that it holds something which is only derivative as a principal characteristic. For Kant, it is the formal law which is the foundation of good, rather than good which serves as its foundation. This position, which is the opposite of that of the Qur'an, as we have seen, is determined in Kant's thought by the very same paralogism which we have just rejected. 'If the concept of good is not derived from an anterior law', he tells us, 'but serves as its foundation, then it can only be the concept of something to be desired.'We believe that, on the contrary, it is not because a law is universal that it can be judged as moral. It is because it is established as just that it must be universalised. Why do we seek universal peace, if it is not because we think that it is necessary for the happy development, for the very existence, of humanity? Suppose, instead, that the weakest must disappear in order to leave space for the fittest: our rule will change instantly, and then the only advice that a moralist should give us is to engage in universal war. Universality only translates in extensive terms that which is first given in the form of a comprehensive essence. In the moral order, as in the order of logic, necessity is the justification for universality, which must, therefore, precede it in the jurist's mind; and moral necessity proceeds from an internal value, not from an external form. 

This reversed conception of the relationship between virtue and the law is merely the transposition onto a metaphysical plane of the doctrine of theological voluntarism, according to which God does not command something because it is intrinsically just; that which He ordains is just only because He has ordained it. It is only a change in vocabulary. Where theologians say: God's supreme command, Kant says: the categorical imperative of pure reason. 

There is this difference, however: the theologians who support this view have a guarantee in divine perfection against unjust commands. What guarantee do we have with this abstract concept of transcendental reason, unless it is identified with divine reason? Do not mistake our thinking. We do discern several aspects within Kantian formalism, since the law of pure reason serves many uses: it is both an objective principle which determines an action and its objects (both good and evil), and a subjective principle (a motivation) which compels the will to obey.We have no difficulty with this last point; on the contrary, we acknowledge that the pure form of the law is perfectly capable of acting on moral conscience. To perform one's duty because it is a duty, without being concerned about the moral good at which it aims: such is the definition of an absolutely devoted will. We shall show that this is the ideal of Qur'anic ethics. You do not ask the doctor whom you trust why he prescribes what he does; any discussion here would be akin to suspicion. Is it the same when it is a matter, not of acting but of judging, evaluating, or prescribing? Can the external form of a law in general act as a principle oflegislation on good and evil? To say that the sole idea of a universal obligation is enough to inform us exactly about the best ways of behaving - this is beyond us. A reason which commands us to obey a law is arbitrary and tyrannical. It is not reasonable if it does not presuppose perfect harmony between that law and the ideal of justice. Kant has thus confused and treated in the same way two very separate aspects of moral conscience: 1. the moment where it is still a matter of instituting the law; 2. 

that where it concerns the execution of a law that is already established. In other words, obligation and intention, ethics and morality. 

c) Universal duty! We agree with it; but we still have to distinguish several different degrees of universality. There are as many concepts as there is extension: paternal, maternal, marital and filial duty; the duties of a leader, a friend, a citizen, a person; the duty to act, the duty to think, the duty to love. Can one legitimately grant all these terms the same influence over every subject and every object, in such a way as to make them drop their respective barriers and overlap one another? Are we authorised to tell a leader to treat his superiors in the same way as his subordinates, or a husband to treat every woman in the world as his own wife, and vice versa? Beyond its limits, every duty ceases to be a duty and may even become a crime. Thus, it always concerns a relative universal, the extension of which can only be defined by the function of the nature of its constitutive elements and from the entire range of appropriate conditions. Dividing duties and defining them is the essential work of a proper moralist. The question is how to proceed. Starting from the absolute can one arrive at the relative without any extraneous borrowing? How can one determine - with the outline of a picture - the colours and all the details that the artist puts in? How can a pure grammarian explain the meaning of the essence of a discourse and the nuances of style? To want to turn ethics into mathematics, into even more than mathematics - what a paradox! It is impossible to deduce all geometrical theorems from a single principle; how can one succeed any better in the science of behaviour? Thus, for lack of a rigorous deduction, which is impossible in this case; rather, with Kant, we witness quite an ingenious reconciliation between form and matter, a kind of adaptation whose aim is to justify, on the one hand, the same rules of common morality, having detached them from their religious or metaphysical roots, and on the other, certain personal views which he adopts on the subject of the virtuous life. We do not dispute that sincere consciences can come together, in the Kantian manner, to examine the moral ideal. If, however, we examine some of these derivative rules in their relationship with his prime principle, they appear to us either to be devoid of a necessary link, or in poor agreement with it. 

Devoid of a necessary link: this is the rule which prescribes respect for humanity, for others as for ourselves, treating the human being as an end in himself. One may ask why pure reason, absolute and autonomous mistress as she is, feels this necessity to respect something other than herself. Is it reasonable to consider as an end that which is only partially so: this mixed nature, made of matter and spirit, more fundamentally sensual than rational? This point does not seem to have entirely escaped the Kantian mind; and it is probably why he restricted his rule to demanding that the human being be treated, not uniquely, but 'at the same time' as an end. Unfortunately, this intellectual rigour did not slacken until he came to the definition of practical duty, in this respect. The logic of the duality of human nature would have had to establish a distinction not only between being a person and an individual, between that which we have in common and that which belongs to each human being, but also between the rights of reason and the needs of the body. 

Kant agrees with everyone else that human beings have the right to personal safety, and the strict duty not to violate someone else's body, or their possessions; he forbids slavery and servitude in all its forms. The effort of refining his thinking was not made in order to utter banalities which are too great to fit his principle. Can there not be seen here something more in the conclusion than in the premises? If respect can and must extend to man's sensible element, why deny it to him in other aspects? Why is it permitted to treat animals as objects, domesticating them and killing them without scruple? Other considerations that are irrelevant to pure logic must without doubt have been present in Kant's mind for him to have integrated this unbalanced process into his conclusions, sometimes in order to expand them, or sometimes to restrict them. 

In poor agreement with the principle, such as when he forbids us to allow anyone to encroach upon our rights. Either the words have lost their meaning, or a right such as it is does not constitute a duty towards the one who possesses it, but towards others. If it is truly my right, then I am free to insist on it or to delegate it to whomsoever I wish. of course, through a kind of division of the self, as an individual subject, I have to defend my right insofar as I am a human being, insofar as I am the trustee of this sacred principle of humanity, but besides the duty of justice, there is that of charity. Should it not also be applied universally? Charity implies, with all the more reason, forgiveness and tolerance; on that account, in commanding us to love our enemies, Christian ethics was much more faithful to the principle of universal duty than Kantian ethics. 

We witness here a tacit acknowledgement that universality cannot be granted to one duty without destroying that of an opposing duty. Actually, the unconditional, categorical imperative cannot be conceived strictly according to the word, which is to say in an absolute fashion, unlimited either by experience or by understanding, unless it is accepted as a unique duty. Since there is, and there must be, a plurality of duties, two cases are possible: either both imperatives will agree, without violating each other, or each one can extend not only to neutralise, but also to oppose the other. 

In the first case, there is no practical difficulty. For instance, we must not lie and we must not kill: two duties which are perfectly compatible and can always go together. Certainly, it is not necessary that they are always imposed simultaneously, one concerning words, the other concerning deeds; but the limits assigned to each of them are not imposed upon them from the outside, but by their very content and the analysis of their own particular concepts, a task which is suitable for the exercise of human understanding, independently of any empirical element. It is in the case of conflicting duties that the most serious difficulties arise. Here are some examples: we have to tell the truth and be polite towards others; what are we to do when speaking the hard truth would be hurtful? I must keep my word, but what happens if I discover that the help I had promised would be given at the expense of a blatant injustice? I must not lie and it is also forbidden for me to abandon a soul I could save; what am I to do when the truth exposes a third person who is innocent? If I tell the truth in such a case, at the cost of someone's life, is it a praiseworthy, honourable action, or one of blameworthy selfishness? If I permit myself to lie in order to save a human life, do I have contempt for myself or do I sacrifice myself? If I attempt a compromise by using an equivocal expression, do I promote virtue, or, on the contrary, compromise it, since I would intend to allow the aggressor to believe the wrong meaning, and thus while avoiding the letter of the lie, I would keep to its spirit. 

The situation can clearly be seen. Here, a generalisation of two imperatives, even if it is conceptual, inevitably leads to their mutual infringement, contradiction and annihilation. From this comes the absolute necessity of narrowing the field of application for one of them, in order to allow space for the other. 

But which one? Are we allowed to privilege one over the other, arbitrarily? How do we confer upon them the equal right to existence without beginning to grant them equal value? Now, it is not unacceptable to give equal status to the indispensable, the necessary and the superfluous, or to what is the most urgent and the least, or existence and perfection. The task of the moralist does not come to an end when he has drawn up a list of duties; he still has to establish a hierarchy of values. And even supposing this order is established, it will never remain definitive, since it is essentially relative; because that which is indispensable in one case may become secondary in another, or even superfluous in a third. Thus, when danger threatens, the most precious goods are sacrificed to save a life, but life is sacrificed to save honour. 

It is in connection with actual reality that the value most worthy to be chosen is defined; it is in nature that one can trace with precision a line of demarcation between different duties, a line which is unstable and always subject to modification. In this way, in order to determine the duty of a given moment, the last word will be reserved for each person's own judgement, maybe even to what is called their sixth sense. 

We now see how the Kantian doctrine is left behind on two counts, and with that we are transported to the other side of the argument. 

Rauh With regard to the opposite extremes to the Kantian doctrine, which attributes all legislative power to transcendental reason, other doctrines have upheld the cause of the freedom of the empirical self. This opposition finds its most striking, indeed its most repulsive expression, in Guyau or Nietzsche, who have respectively reduced morality to a feeling for beauty or a living will. 

From this latter point of view, moral value does not exist already in the order of eternal things; it is a human creation through which man goes beyond himself to become the superman. 

Without pushing this revolutionary idea to its limit, which tends to remove completely the idea of obligation and with that, ethics itself; and whilst acknowledging the transcendence of the idea of duty in relation to the individual, the French philosopher, Frederic Rauh, meanwhile posited that each individual was the author of their own rules. One can say, without fear of being paradoxical, that, despite the distance that separates them, this thought meets - even coincides in a certain measure - with that of Kant. They only retain the notion of duty in a general sense, which does not include particular commands. However, after this coinciding starting point, the two views immediately begin to diverge. Whereas the German philosopher glides through the sky of logic, only gradually descending towards concrete reality, and even then with great reserve, the author of Experience morale rushes hurriedly towards the psychological realm. We have seen how, departing from the idea that it is the essence of any good which is of value for all wills, Kant had tried to create commands from this abstract principle that were less abstract, and from these a few rules that were still more concrete. Having discovered these commands, he encapsulated them forever within a rigid and immobile framework, isolated from each other, like Leibnitzian monads. The problem of conflicting duties never arose for him, since everything passed before his eyes as if each action had to be determined by one and only one rule. 

Rauh was more correct when he declared that no abstract rule is able to rule concrete reality by itself, in the same way that it is impossible to determine a point on a map without referring to several other points, or to explain a word in a text without taking the context into account; in the same way that the art of medicine cannot guarantee the efficacy of a medicine without taking into account the sick person's state and the course of the illness; or in the same way that the moralist cannot remove human behaviour which is essentially spatio-temporal from the effects of space and time. Our action is a real creation which is destined to take place in the real world. Therefore, it is not enough for it to be logically possible; it must be practically demonstrable; it must find its place amid the facts which surround it, in such a way that it is neither hindered by the events which precede it, nor negated by those which follow it. Thus, before we make any decision, we have no option but to inform ourselves of its objective reality, not only in the course of its present development but also in its history and its future. And that is not all: it is also necessary to take into account, at the same time, the diversity of mental factors which determine our reaction to nature. In multiplying one series of factors by the other, the result which we obtain for each new case is always an original product. Add the irreversibility of time and you come to the unequivocal conclusion that two moments in history can never be identical. This demonstrates the relative character of the ethical life. 

However, our philosopher, who knew how to avoid the Kantian error, was not able to prevent himself from falling into the reverse trap. According to his way of teaching ethics, everything happens as if the dissimilarity of two moments in life excluded their resemblance and did not allow anything in common between them; as if, besides the individual element, there was no place for a generic element; as if, behind everything that happens, nothing was nothing enduring. This is why he invites us to concentrate our attention on the temporary; he overtly encourages us to free ourselves from principles and ideals. Instead of submitting to them, we should ceaselessly put them to the test.Hence, not only must everyone legislate on his own duty according to his temperament, vocation and aspirations, but each person must constantly call his own rules into question, at every moment demolishing whatever they have only just built the previous moment. Do we not risk caprice and arbitrariness when we abandon ourselves to such an anarchic life? But this is not the most important point: we must question ourselves about the very principle that experience has the power to guide the conscience. 

Experience prefers facts, whereas conscience feeds on values. By what sort of magical operation can we turn facts into values? Rauh himself acknowledges that a value judgement can never be made from a simple judgement of reality, no matter in what form this reality is presented, whether objective or subjective, simple or complex, in the past, present or future. 

Concerning the past and present, all that we can gather from our experimental inquiry can be summed up in the simple observation that a particular act has always been followed by a particular result. We record the fact, we take action upon it, nothing else. No doubt, when we judge whether the effect was good or evil, we are inclined, even well-placed to judge the same about the action which has caused it. But what actually enables us to judge the effect? If our experience results in an appreciative judgement, if it 'emerges', then it is not the origin of this judgement, but only the circumstance. Its having happened does not mean that it should please or displease us. Even if there is a natural relationship between the two judgements it is still necessary to make an important distinction here: our estimative judgement itself is an assessable reality, a mental fact which arises out of experience, since it falls within the category of internal observation. 

However, the object of this judgement is a value, which by definition escapes any experience and is infinitely beyond it. Experience only attempts to approach it step by step, with the strange feeling that it is both recognisable and indefinable. Value belongs to the order of the absolute; it is not inscribed in the temporal, even if the latter seems to suggest it. It is not there, then, that we decipher it.