
The part played by experience is even smaller with regard to the future, which is the only domain of the moral act (not being of the order of that which is, but of that which must be, since it is impossible to decide to do something in the past, or even at the very moment where a decision is being made). 

Firstly, it is hardly worth recalling that it is not experience as such which entitles me to conclude that, if things have happened in a certain way up to now, they will happen tomorrow and for always in the same way. This induction is logically based upon our belief in the stability of nature. Such is the case too with the law of high numbers, which must postulate the nonintervention of new causes likely to disrupt the average rate of our calculations. Finally, with all my experimental knowledge and its appertaining postulates, what do I achieve? I learn of the practical possibility (or impossibility) of achieving an objective, or of the degree of probability of success. 

What will tell me if that which I plan is worthy of my research? And when faced with several possibilities, what is going to make me decide to select a particular one from among them, which might be the least favoured by human nature? It is all too obvious that the preference we give to a certain direction in our activity, to the exclusion of all others, arises not from reality, but from an ideal. So, if this ideal is only an emanation of our empirical inconstant self; if it is only an attribute of our effective or virtual feelings, it too becomes a transitory attribute, an instantaneous phenomenon. How can it claim the right to rule an act that is about to happen, when it might itself be no more when the act is about to begin? Thus one thing arises out of two: either our will can content itself with an ideal which coincides with the act, which is born and dies with it, like the will of impulsive or insane people, or, on the contrary, it will demand of it its rights, through which the ideal will be imposed upon it, for the future as well as the immediate present, which means that it will demand it to have some stability before allowing it the right to rule over it. Then we will no longer be in the realm of the empirical self and pure experience, since a stable ideal is the very definition of moral law. A law is never a product of experience, but an object of demonstration, or of faith. 

'Experience' which makes authority 'moral': is this not a contradiction in terms? Conclusion It has now been demonstrated with clear evidence that both doctrines only retain one aspect of moral truth. Their common mistake is more in their exclusivism and their reciprocal negation than in their positive position. 

So, that which happened to the theory of knowledge has now happened to . practical philosophy. Idealism or realism, rationalism or empiricism, and so many other philosophical schools of thought, are only in opposition because each has insisted on one necessary condition of human knowledge, holding it to be the sufficient condition and total cause, when it is only one element among many others. On one hand, neither logical concept, nor scientific law, nor the sum total of all known concepts and laws, can ever meet and define the concrete object completely, which is the point at which they come together, but which is infinitely beyond them. On the other hand, any real object will remain completely irrelevant and inaccessible to us if it is not subsumed into the forms and laws of our mind. In other words, if prime principles and general laws exempted us absolutely from confronting them with reality; if reality had nothing more, offered us no new aspect, the world would become undifferentiated, indiscernible; it would be without life, without history or dimensions. If, conversely, there were no acquired truth and established law, the mind would cease to be itself: it would lose its structural unity, disintegrate and would have no hold on human nature. In the same way, from a practical point of view, if a scientist always had to start everything again from the beginning, no progress would be possible, and the edifice of truth would never be built. It is when idea and object, form and matter, hypothesis and experience, come together, that the spark of true knowledge ignites. 

And so it is with morality. Neither the abstract formulation of a general rule, nor the painstaking analysis of a particular situation, made separately from one another, would ever be enough to guide our will. As we saw earlier, it is the synthesis of a universal ideal coming from above and an actual reality, which is only a means of clarification, that provide an excellent guide for our conscience. Like a hyphen between the ideal and the real, between the absolute and the relative, the human conscience must always bring these two terms together, by establishing such an agreement between them that the act which is born from their happy marriage is imbued with these two characteristics: it represents both the stability of eternal law and the novelty of artistic creation. 

Is this not the very conception of obligation such as it is defined in the precepts of the Qur' an? be mindful of Alliih, as much as you can. 64:16 Can we not immediately see the characteristic feature which distinguishes this formulation from the others? It does not say: do what seems good to you, according to the inspiration of the moment; it is not that of a rigid tyrannical duty which does not admit of exception or modification. It is neither the one nor the other; yet it responds to both of their deep tendencies. In these concise and lucid terms, the Qur'an invites us to turn our eyes towards heaven, whilst supporting us with the solid foundations of reality. In this way the two ends of the chain are linked: ascension towards the ideal, while safeguarding human nature; submission to the law and freedom of the self. 

But, you say, can this be possible? Won't these two opposing terms clash together again? From the moment that each individual is allowed to determine his duty in relation to his particular situation, is he not also allowed to relate it to his most capricious notions and undermine the authority of the commandment? Not at all. For the conscience which the Qur'an addresses is not the empty, brute conscience which has been left without any other guidance than its primitive instinct, as attributed by Rousseau to his natural man; nor is it the conscience of a fictional self, like Kant's transcendental self. It is a conscience which joins together two conditions that are absent from others. Firstly, it is enlightened by a positive teaching wherein duties are clearly defined and ranked. It is, furthermore, confronted with a living reality which is greatly venerated. In other words, it is the conscience of a believer. Now the characteristic of this conscience is that it contains within itself the personality of its legislator, who is always ready to be consulted. It cannot, therefore, surrender itself to considerations which it recognises to be illegitimate in the eyes of the author of the law, without betraying itself. 

Here is an example: God says to me: 'Do this unless you cannot; do not do this unless you are compelled by necessity'; and He also warns me against secret yearnings which might tempt me to transgress the commandment, on the pretext offalse necessity.In these circumstances, can I justify myselfby considering a little disturbance to be an obstacle, or some mild intimidation to be a force of necessity, when I know that it is not what God meant by these words? Of course, God does not always respond to me explicitly in doubtful cases; He may not even suggest the same positive or negative solution to all of us. 

There will always be opportunities for me to commit an error of interpretation or of definition. This eventuality is a natural consequence of my human condition and of the freedom granted to me by this very condition. In a doubtful case, what is essential for me, as a believer, is to strive to discern and follow faithfully what might be God's recommendation, considering the entirety of all His rules. If my solution is wrong, then I shall not be held guilty if I have made the necessary effort, which is my own, to enlighten myself. That in doubtful cases everyone is obliged to refer to his own conscience and abide by its response is what the Prophet, inspired by the Qur'an, told us in his famous words, some of which are as follows: 'The purely licit and the purely illicit have been made clear; but between the two are unclear cases. He who restrains himself when in doubt has saved his faith and honour.' 'Avoid that which throws you into doubt; choose that which does not trouble you; truth is peace; falsehood leads to suspicion.'When asked to give a definition of good and evil, the Prophet answered: 'Ask your heart, consult your conscience; good is what gives peace to the soul and the heart; evil is that which troubles the soul and makes the heart palpitate, whatever men may say and whatever they may offer you.' But, you object, apart from such doubtful cases, which are relatively rare, if the law has determined everything, the individual conscience will not have any part left to play in the institution of duty. We would say that is true if a rule were never able to direct all the individuals that it governs, to plan for each individual all the cases which it has to solve, and for every case to provide a concrete image of the unanimous verdict that agrees with the other rules. In other words, it would be true if there were only one way of understanding a rule, one single way of applying it and of bringing it in agreement with the others. It is not any of these points of view. 

Even if we suppose that the first point is resolved, we will easily see that the most precise rule that one can formulate inevitably comprises some undetermined aspect. Between the undetermined and the determined there lies a whole gamut of options, not only for the free choice of a psychological conscience, but also for the intelligent evaluation of the moral conscience, since the distinctive features of any singular act are neither all to be ignored nor all to be considered; most of the time they have both characteristics, either in succession according to the case, or simultaneously, according to the point of view at which one is placed. It therefore requires an individual effort and a special tact to appredate them for their proper value and to choose those which are the most essential. 